profile/javascript/typeConstruct/typeConstruct.md, before:

# JavaScript type and construct

📖 **Suggested reading**: [MDN Data types and structures](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures)

## Declaring variables

Variables are declared using either the `let` or `const` keyword. `let` allows you to change the value of the variable while `const` will cause an error if you attempt to change it.

```js
let x = 1;

const y = 2;
```

⚠ Originally JavaScript used the keyword `var` to define variables. This has been deprecated because they cause hard to detect errors in code related to the scope of the variable. You should avoid `var` and always declare your variables either with `let` or `const`.

## Type

JavaScript defines several primitives types.

| Type        | Meaning                                                    |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Null`      | The type of a variable that has not been assigned a value. |
| `Undefined` | The type of a variable that has not been defined.          |
| `Boolean`   | true or false.                                             |
| `Number`    | A 64 bit signed number.                                    |
| `BigInt`    | A number of arbitrary magnitude.                           |
| `String`    | A textual sequence of characters.                          |
| `Symbol`    | A unique value.                                            |

Of these types Boolean, Number, and String are the types commonly thought of when creating variables. However, variables may commonly refer to the Null or Undefined primitive. Because JavaScript does not enforce the declaration of a variable before you use it, it is entirely possible for a variable to have the type of undefined.

In addition to the above primitives, JavaScript defines several object types. Some of the more commonly used objects include the following.

| Type       | Use                                                                                    | Example                  |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| `Object`   | A collection of properties represented by name value pairs. Values can be of any type. | `{a:3, b:'fish'}`        |
| `Function` | An object that has the ability to be called.                                           | `function a() {}`        |
| `Date`     | Calendar dates and times.                                                              | `new Date('1995-12-17')` |
| `Array`    | An ordered sequence of any type.                                                       | `[3, 'fish']`            |
| `Map`      | A collection of key value pairs that support efficient lookups.                        | `new Map()`              |
| `JSON`     | A lightweight data-interchange format used to share information across programs.       | `{"a":3, "b":"fish"}`    |

## Common operators

When dealing with a number variable, JavaScript supports standard mathematical operators like `+` (add), `-` (subtract), `*` (multiply), `/` (divide), and `===` (equality). For string variables, JavaScript support `+` (concatenation) and `===` (equality).

## Type conversions

JavaScript is a weakly typed language. That means that a variable always has a type, but the variable can change type when it is assigned a new value, or that types can be automatically converted based upon the context that they are used in. Sometime the results of automatic conversions can be unexpected from programmers who are use to strongly typed languages. Consider the following examples.

```js
2 + '3';
// OUTPUT: '23'
2 * '3';
// OUTPUT: 6
[2] + [3];
// OUTPUT: '23'
true + null;
// OUTPUT: 1
true + undefined;
// OUTPUT: NaN
```

Getting unexpected results is especially common when dealing with the [equality](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Equality_comparisons_and_sameness) operator.

```js
1 == '1';
// OUTPUT: true
null == undefined;
// OUTPUT: true
'' == false;
// OUTPUT: true
```

⚠ The unexpected results happen in JavaScript because it uses [complex rules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Equality_comparisons_and_sameness#strict_equality_using) for defining equality that depend upon the conversion of a type to a boolean value. You will sometimes hear this referred to as [falsy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Falsy) and truthy evaluations. To remove this confusion, JavaScript introduced the strict equality (===) and inequality (!==) operators. The strict operators skip the type conversion when computing equality. This results in the following.

```js
1 === '1';
// OUTPUT: false
null === undefined;
// OUTPUT: false
'' === false;
// OUTPUT: false
```

Because strict equality is considered more intuitive, it is almost always preferred and should be used in your code.

Here is a fun example of JavaScript's type conversion. Execute the following in the browser's debugger console.

```js
('b' + 'a' + +'a' + 'a').toLowerCase();
```

## Conditionals

JavaScript supports many common programming language conditional constructs. This includes `if`, `else`, and `if else`. Here are some examples.

```js
if (a === 1) {
  //...
} else if (b === 2) {
  //...
} else {
  //...
}
```

You can also use the ternary operator. This provides a compact `if else` representation.

```js
a === 1 ? console.log(1) : console.log('not 1');
```

You can use boolean operations in the expression to create complex predicates. Common boolean operators include `&&` (and), `||` (or), and `!` (not).

```js
if (true && (!false || true)) {
  //...
}
```

### Loops

JavaScript support many common programming language looping constructs. This includes `for`, `for in`, `for of`, `while`, `do while`, and `switch`. Here are some examples.

### for

Note the introduction of the common post increment operation (`i++`) for adding one to a number.

```js
for (let i = 0; i < 2; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

### do while

```js
let i = 0;
do {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
} while (i < 2);
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

### while

```js
let i = 0;
while (i < 2) {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
}
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

### for in

The `for in` statement iterates over an object's property names.

```js
const obj = { a: 1, b: 'fish' };
for (const name in obj) {
  console.log(name);
}
// OUTPUT: a
// OUTPUT: b
```

For arrays the object's name is the array index.

```js
const arr = ['a', 'b'];
for (const name in arr) {
  console.log(name);
}
// OUTPUT: 0
// OUTPUT: 1
```

### for of

The `for of` statement iterates over an iterable's (Array, Map, Set, ...) property values.

```js
const arr = ['a', 'b'];
for (const val of arr) {
  console.log(val);
}
// OUTPUT: 'a'
// OUTPUT: 'b'
```

### Break and continue

All of the looping constructs demonstrated above allow for either a `break` or `continue` statement to abort or advance the loop.

```js
let i = 0;
while (true) {
  console.log(i);
  if (i === 0) {
    i++;
    continue;
  } else {
    break;
  }
}
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

## ☑ Assignment

Create a CodePen that uses conditional and loop statements.

When you are done submit your CodePen URL, along with a comment about something you found interesting, to the Canvas assignment.

Commit message:

Updated instruction for console in codepen

profile/javascript/typeConstruct/typeConstruct.md, after:

# JavaScript type and construct

📖 **Suggested reading**: [MDN Data types and structures](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures)

## Declaring variables

Variables are declared using either the `let` or `const` keyword. `let` allows you to change the value of the variable while `const` will cause an error if you attempt to change it.

```js
let x = 1;

const y = 2;
```

⚠ Originally JavaScript used the keyword `var` to define variables. This has been deprecated because they cause hard to detect errors in code related to the scope of the variable. You should avoid `var` and always declare your variables either with `let` or `const`.

## Type

JavaScript defines several primitives types.

| Type        | Meaning                                                    |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Null`      | The type of a variable that has not been assigned a value. |
| `Undefined` | The type of a variable that has not been defined.          |
| `Boolean`   | true or false.                                             |
| `Number`    | A 64 bit signed number.                                    |
| `BigInt`    | A number of arbitrary magnitude.                           |
| `String`    | A textual sequence of characters.                          |
| `Symbol`    | A unique value.                                            |

Of these types Boolean, Number, and String are the types commonly thought of when creating variables. However, variables may commonly refer to the Null or Undefined primitive. Because JavaScript does not enforce the declaration of a variable before you use it, it is entirely possible for a variable to have the type of undefined.

In addition to the above primitives, JavaScript defines several object types. Some of the more commonly used objects include the following.

| Type       | Use                                                                                    | Example                  |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| `Object`   | A collection of properties represented by name value pairs. Values can be of any type. | `{a:3, b:'fish'}`        |
| `Function` | An object that has the ability to be called.                                           | `function a() {}`        |
| `Date`     | Calendar dates and times.                                                              | `new Date('1995-12-17')` |
| `Array`    | An ordered sequence of any type.                                                       | `[3, 'fish']`            |
| `Map`      | A collection of key value pairs that support efficient lookups.                        | `new Map()`              |
| `JSON`     | A lightweight data-interchange format used to share information across programs.       | `{"a":3, "b":"fish"}`    |

## Common operators

When dealing with a number variable, JavaScript supports standard mathematical operators like `+` (add), `-` (subtract), `*` (multiply), `/` (divide), and `===` (equality). For string variables, JavaScript support `+` (concatenation) and `===` (equality).

## Type conversions

JavaScript is a weakly typed language. That means that a variable always has a type, but the variable can change type when it is assigned a new value, or that types can be automatically converted based upon the context that they are used in. Sometime the results of automatic conversions can be unexpected from programmers who are use to strongly typed languages. Consider the following examples.

```js
2 + '3';
// OUTPUT: '23'
2 * '3';
// OUTPUT: 6
[2] + [3];
// OUTPUT: '23'
true + null;
// OUTPUT: 1
true + undefined;
// OUTPUT: NaN
```

Getting unexpected results is especially common when dealing with the [equality](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Equality_comparisons_and_sameness) operator.

```js
1 == '1';
// OUTPUT: true
null == undefined;
// OUTPUT: true
'' == false;
// OUTPUT: true
```

⚠ The unexpected results happen in JavaScript because it uses [complex rules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Equality_comparisons_and_sameness#strict_equality_using) for defining equality that depend upon the conversion of a type to a boolean value. You will sometimes hear this referred to as [falsy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Falsy) and truthy evaluations. To remove this confusion, JavaScript introduced the strict equality (===) and inequality (!==) operators. The strict operators skip the type conversion when computing equality. This results in the following.

```js
1 === '1';
// OUTPUT: false
null === undefined;
// OUTPUT: false
'' === false;
// OUTPUT: false
```

Because strict equality is considered more intuitive, it is almost always preferred and should be used in your code.

Here is a fun example of JavaScript's type conversion. Execute the following in the browser's debugger console.

```js
('b' + 'a' + +'a' + 'a').toLowerCase();
```

## Conditionals

JavaScript supports many common programming language conditional constructs. This includes `if`, `else`, and `if else`. Here are some examples.

```js
if (a === 1) {
  //...
} else if (b === 2) {
  //...
} else {
  //...
}
```

You can also use the ternary operator. This provides a compact `if else` representation.

```js
a === 1 ? console.log(1) : console.log('not 1');
```

You can use boolean operations in the expression to create complex predicates. Common boolean operators include `&&` (and), `||` (or), and `!` (not).

```js
if (true && (!false || true)) {
  //...
}
```

### Loops

JavaScript support many common programming language looping constructs. This includes `for`, `for in`, `for of`, `while`, `do while`, and `switch`. Here are some examples.

### for

Note the introduction of the common post increment operation (`i++`) for adding one to a number.

```js
for (let i = 0; i < 2; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

### do while

```js
let i = 0;
do {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
} while (i < 2);
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

### while

```js
let i = 0;
while (i < 2) {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
}
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

### for in

The `for in` statement iterates over an object's property names.

```js
const obj = { a: 1, b: 'fish' };
for (const name in obj) {
  console.log(name);
}
// OUTPUT: a
// OUTPUT: b
```

For arrays the object's name is the array index.

```js
const arr = ['a', 'b'];
for (const name in arr) {
  console.log(name);
}
// OUTPUT: 0
// OUTPUT: 1
```

### for of

The `for of` statement iterates over an iterable's (Array, Map, Set, ...) property values.

```js
const arr = ['a', 'b'];
for (const val of arr) {
  console.log(val);
}
// OUTPUT: 'a'
// OUTPUT: 'b'
```

### Break and continue

All of the looping constructs demonstrated above allow for either a `break` or `continue` statement to abort or advance the loop.

```js
let i = 0;
while (true) {
  console.log(i);
  if (i === 0) {
    i++;
    continue;
  } else {
    break;
  }
}
// OUTPUT: 0 1
```

## ☑ Assignment

Create a CodePen that uses conditional and loop statements.

The console for code pen can be found at the bottom left of the window. Just click the console button and it will pull up with your logs.

When you are done submit your CodePen URL, along with a comment about something you found interesting, to the Canvas assignment.
